<time>March 12, 2013</time> 

Build a blog using Grunt
--------

This blog is an early [prototype](https://github.com/davidvanleeuwen/blog) and an experiment. My goal is to post a series of articles about all kinds of JavaScript goodness. With every article I'll improve this blog and explain how I did it. It's more of a book with in-depth tutorials. This time, I'll get into Grunt, because I use it as a base for all my projects.

**Just a little sidenote**:  If you're a JavaScript beginner - you'll find everything here about how to build complex JavaScript applications. If you're a JavaScript novice, you might find useful tips and tricks or you can pull request my blog to help get the right information out there.

### The result ###

Let's create a blog, using JavaScript and some other simple tools. The articles should be written in Markdown - so we can easily write it. The development environment should be painless. Including things like [LiveReload](http://livereload.com/), [RequireJS](http://requirejs.org) and things like CoffeeScript, Haml and Sass. And in the end, it should just compile to a simple static blog. So that's where Grunt comes in.

### How to get started ###

You don't need to read everything. You can just head over [my Github](https://github.com/davidvanleeuwen/blog) and clone the thing and run your own blog. Or if you're here to learn something new, read the whole article. Alright, so let's get started. If you're completely new to Grunt, please take a look at their [official website](http://gruntjs.com/). I've found all the useful plugins, so if you go to the folder and run the following:

<code data-gist="https://gist.github.com/5128696.json"></code>

This will install all the needed Grunt plugins. You can always your own if you prefer, or update them easily using your `package.json` file. Please make sure you're running the latest Grunt-cli, by doing:

<code data-gist="https://gist.github.com/5128754.json"></code>

That's it.

### Step by step ###

Grunt is an amazing tool to build your JavaScript applications more efficient. You can run tasks in your command line, to run other scripts and tools that you're familiar with. To get Grunt in your project, the only thing you'll have to do is create a file called `Gruntfile.coffee`. So first we'll get Haml, Sass and Coffeescript in there. Because those are my preferred languages to make this happen.

<code data-gist="https://gist.github.com/5129146.json"></code>

The `module.exports = (grunt) ->` is a wrapper function for Grunt itself. You can load NPM (Node Packages) in your project and these are specifically for Grunt. But we still need to make our own tasks that we can run from our terminal. We'll need to define what files need to be compiled to normal HTML, CSS and JavaScript.

<code data-gist="https://gist.github.com/5129286.json"></code>

It looks complicated, but it's more of a repetition. The important thing here is to understand your project structure. We have a `src/` folder and a `blog/` folder. The `src/` folder contains all Haml, Sass and CoffeeScript files. And it compiles everything to the `blog/` folder.

Every task is predefined, because we're using the npm tasks. Within those tasks you can define your own sub tasks. So within the predefined coffee task, we have a scripts and main task. It requires to define a files object. And with `grunt.file.expandMapping` you can run through every file and rename the output file. We're doing that because it will otherwise copy the path in the `src/` as well, and we want it to be relative.

Every predefined task has it own options. You can find every plugin and the correspondending info on the [Grunt Plugin page](http://gruntjs.com/plugins). Everything with `contrib-` is maintained by Grunt, so others can be outdated or unmaintained repo's.

### Get your tasks running ###

To let this thing do it's work, you can call every task by hand or make a task, that combines these tasks.

<code data-gist="https://gist.github.com/5129495.json"></code>

Now you can call `grunt build` from your terminal in the project folder and it will compile everything. But we don't want to hit build everytime you made a change. So let's take it a step further. We want to use LiveReload, to make it easy to develop and we want write this article in Markdown.

So for LiveReload we can use the [grunt-contrib-livereload](https://github.com/gruntjs/grunt-contrib-livereload) plugin. It has more dependencies to make it work. For one, it need to run on a server and it needs a watcher to see changes we make to our files. So the result of this task would look like this:

<code data-gist="https://gist.github.com/5129548.json"></code>

The order matters. So in this task, we first run connect (the server), build it, starting the livereload server, let it open my browser and go directly to the blog and setup the watcher to wait for any changes.

So when we run `grunt watch`, it will start a process and it will do all the work.

### Markdown with RequireJS ###

RequireJS is a great tool for JavaScript developers, but at it can look pretty scary at first. If you're not familiar with RequireJS, you might now other things like Sprockets (for Rails) or an equivalent dependency manager/module loader. It's not just to make your code look fancy, but the main advantage is that you decide the order when files load. Instead of using `01_` as prefix for your files for example, you can neatly define the order of the files, without having to think if the file is loaded on the page.

But it's not just for JavaScript. It can load Markdown as well, because just like Grunt, it can run external plugins. By using the [mdown plugin](https://github.com/millermedeiros/requirejs-plugins), I can include a Markdown files in my code. So let's take a look at the Gruntfile now:

<code data-gist="https://gist.github.com/5129664.json"></code>

It also has a similar config as Grunt itself, which you can find in `src/main.coffee`. The nice thing is I've also created a deploy variant, because I don't want to use RequireJS in a production environment. So we're using a drop-in-replacement for RequireJS called Almond and let RequireJS uglify the file for me, which it does as optimization. It also doesn't include the RequireJS plugins (mdown), so it stays small and only uses the output. Note that I'm running the RequireJS subtasks for this (`requirejs:deploy`). Now when you hit `grunt deploy`, you'll end up with just one JavaScript file - and that's the blog.

### What's next ###

Depending if you like this idea and want to read more, I'll create more articles often. Otherwise I'll just add them gradually. The next article will dive into Backbone and especially Backbone.Marionette. Other ideas are about other Backbone plugins like Memento, Paginator, Stickit/Modelbinder etc. Or dive into different things like NodeJS, Jasmine etc. But everything will have to do with creating Single Page Apps, using JavaScript and apply this to this blog as a demo.

So let me know what you think and tweet about this article [@davidvanleeuwen](http://twitter.com/davidvanleeuwen).